---
layout: post
title:  "Why i think source based distros can be more secure than binary ones"
date:   2024-02-23 19:39:35 +0100
categories: linux
---

# What are source based Linux distributions
A source based distro is an operating system using the Linux kernel where
it's packages are built from the source code at the users system. The most
prominent example of a source based distro is [gentoo](https://www.gentoo.org/).

A binary distro one, where the packages are built centralized on the distros
ci and the users system downloads the pre-built binaries.

There are also somewhat hybrid distros like [Arch](https://archlinux.org/), where some community
maintained packages are distributed in the [AUR](https://aur.archlinux.org/), which are usually source based
and official maintained packages are distributed in binary form.

And there is [NixOS](https://nixos.org/), which behaves very much like a source based distro but
is able to download almost all packages in binary form as a pretty nice
side-effect of using a functional package management approach.

```plantuml
skinparam backgroundColor transparent
skinparam actorStyle awesome

rectangle "Distribution Developers" {
  actor "Package Maintainer"
  usecase Receipe
  rectangle "CI"
  rectangle Repository
}

rectangle "Software Developers" {
  actor Developer
  usecase "Source Code"
  usecase "Buildsystem Konfiguration"
}

rectangle Buildsystem
rectangle "Package Manager"

Developer -d-> "Source Code" : Writes
Developer -d-> "Buildsystem Konfiguration" : Writes
Buildsystem -u-> "Buildsystem Konfiguration" : Reads
Buildsystem -u-> "Source Code" : Builds

"Package Maintainer" -d--> Receipe: Writes
Receipe -> Buildsystem: Executes

"CI" -u-> Receipe: Executes
"CI" -d-> Repository: Uploads

"Package Manager" -u-> Repository: Downloads
```


```plantuml
skinparam backgroundColor transparent
skinparam actorStyle awesome

rectangle "Distribution Developers" {
  actor "Package Maintainer"
  usecase Receipe
}

rectangle "Software Developers" {
  actor Developer
  usecase "Source Code"
  usecase "Buildsystem Konfiguration"
}

rectangle Buildsystem
rectangle "Package Manager"

Developer -d-> "Source Code" : Writes
Developer -d-> "Buildsystem Konfiguration" : Writes
Buildsystem -u-> "Buildsystem Konfiguration" : Reads
Buildsystem -u-> "Source Code" : Builds

"Package Maintainer" -d--> Receipe: Writes
Receipe -> Buildsystem: Executes

"Package Manager" -u-> Receipe: Executes
```




# What are the advantages and disadvantages of source based Linux distributions

Source based distros often don't have the best reputation, since they aren't
as easy to use as binary ones as waiting for compilation takes lots of time
and wastes lots of energy.

Of course they also offer advantages like being extremely customizable.
Another advantage that isn't often talked about is that they can be more secure
then binary distros.

# How source based Linux distribution can affect the security of a system

Lots of open source software can not only be configured during runtime but also
during compile time. Often they can be configured which feature should be
included and which shouldn't. The Linux kernel has hundrets (if not thousands)
of options which feature and which hardware is builtin (or built as module).

Since the maintainers of a binary distro know neither which hardware you use nor
which usecase you want to realize they will just enable almost everything. So they
can make sure that your hardware and your usecase is supported on their distro.

But code has bugs. And some bugs are security relevant ones. To keep the attack
surface as low as possible one should use as less code as possible to acchieve
the usecase. And this is something that's only really possible on source-based
distros.

The most famous example is propably [heartbleed](https://heartbleed.com).
Hardbleed was a bug in a very specific part of OpenSSL. That part was the
heartbeat functionality. Setting up an TLS connection is expensive, so
one doesn't want to re-establish a TLS connection but keep using the current
one and that's why this functionality was added.
This bug was rather critical since it allowed reading out all the data openssl
had access to. And since openssl is mainly used for cryptographic stuff it
usually has access to very critical information like decryption keys one
really doesn't want to be public.

There were lots of ideas how such severe bugs can be prevented in the future
like rewriting everything in rust or throwing money at projects like openssl.
But nobody really talked about how this could have been easily prevented by
just using a version of openssl that doesn't include this feature.

OpenSSL is used by lots of different software. But the majority of them are
webservers. Webservers use http as communication protocol. And http has its own
keep-alive ability, so openssl heartbeat isn't used. Still webservers where
severly affected by heartbeat since they used the openssl provided by their
binary distros. And since the distro maintainers didn't know

